add (unlinked) page about Isolated Projects (#28317)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/optimizing-performance/isolated_projects.adoc

// Copyright (C) 2023 Gradle, Inc.
//
// Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.;
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

:gradle-issues: https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/

= Isolated Projects

> Isolated Projects is a pre-alpha Gradle feature that extends the configuration cache to further improve performance, in particular the performance of Android Studio and IDEA sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isolated Projects is a pre-alpha Gradle feature that extends the configuration cache to improve performance, particularly the performance of Android Studio and IDEA sync.
```

When isolated projects is enabled, the configuration model of Gradle projects are "isolated" from each other.
This means that build logic, such as build scripts or plugins, applied to a project cannot directly access the mutable state of another project.

> This allows configuration and tooling model creation for each project to safely run in parallel and the result cached and invalidated for each project independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows configuration and tooling model creation for each project to run in parallel safely, and the result is cached and invalidated for each project independently.
```

== Status as of Gradle 8.5

When isolated projects is enabled, Gradle applies two levels of caching during IDE sync:

Gradle starts by applying coarse-grained caching.
To do this, Gradle caches the result of the entire sync operation and reuses it when nothing that affects the IDE model has changed.

> When the cache entry can be reused, Gradle short-circuits the entire sync operation and simply returns the cached result to the IDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the cache entry can be reused, Gradle short-circuits the entire sync operation and returns the cached result to the IDE.
```

> Generally, the settings and build scripts affect the IDE model, but the source code of the projects does not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, the settings and build scripts affect the IDE model, but the source code does not.
```

> So, when these scripts change the cache entry cannot be reused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, when these scripts change, the cache entry cannot be reused.
```

> When this happens, Gradle falls back to fine-grained caching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this happens, Gradle falls back to fine-grained caching.

```

To do this, Gradle caches the result of creating the tooling models for each project and reuses these models when nothing that affects them has changed.
When the cached models for a project can be reused, Gradle short-circuits all work for that project,

> including the project's configuration phase and other work such as dependency resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
including the project's configuration phase and other work, such as dependency resolution.
```

This means that Gradle will only configure and create tooling models for projects whose configuration has changed.
This work is done in parallel for each project.

=== Current limitations

> Isolated projects is a pre-alpha feature, and as such there are a number of limitations in the current implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isolated projects is a pre-alpha feature, and as such, there are some limitations in the current implementation.
```

These will addressed in future Gradle releases:

> * Gradle, IDEA, Android Studio and the Kotlin plugins are not yet 100% compatible with isolated projects, so you should expect to see some violations reported. The teams are actively working on fixing these incompatibilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Gradle, IDEA, Android Studio, and the Kotlin plugins are not yet 100% compatible with isolated projects, so you should expect to see some violations reported. The teams are actively working on fixing these incompatibilities.
```

* Parallel configuration and fine-grained caching are not applied to task execution. They are only applied to IDE sync.
* Changes to included builds invalidate all cached results, even when the change would not affect the cached results.

> * The implementation does not attempt to take advantage of the isolation to limit peak memory consumption. Currently, peak memory consumption is a function of how many project need to be configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The implementation does not attempt to take advantage of the isolation to limit peak memory consumption. Currently, peak memory consumption is a function of how many projects need to be configured.
```

* All caching is done on the local machine, as for the configuration cache. There is no support for remote caching yet.

== How do I use it?

> To use isolated projects, you will need Gradle 8.5 or later and preferably a recent nightly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isolated projects require Gradle 8.5 or later, preferably a recent nightly.
```

You should also use the most recent version of IDEA or Android Studio.

The feature is off by default.
You can enable it by setting the `org.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects` system property to `true`.
For example:

----
$ gradle build -Dorg.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects=true
----

When enabled, Gradle will fail the build whenever build logic attempts to cross project boundaries and access the model of another project.

> Gradle collects all of these access problems in the configuration cache report, in the same way as other problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failures, including access problems, are documented in the configuration cache report.
```

The configuration cache command-line options can be used to control how Gradle handles these problems. For example:

> * `--configuration-cache-problems=warn` can be used to treat the access problems as warnings instead of errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `--configuration-cache-problems=warn` can be used to treat access problems as warnings instead of errors.
```

* `-Dorg.gradle.configuration-cache.max-problems=x` can be used to increase the maximum number of problems included in the report.

You can also use `-Dorg.gradle.internal.invalidate-coupled-projects=false` to force parallel configuration when there are access problems.

> Please be aware that these options disable the validation that makes execution parallel- and caching-safe when isolated projects is enabled,

Reviewer: Hey Rodrigo, I don't understand this sentence. Can you reword it?

> so you may see some unexpected behaviour when using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so you may see some unexpected behavior when using them.
```
